## Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

> [!definition] Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
> Two definitions:
>
> -   Total **expenditure** on **domestically produced final goods and services**
> -   Total **income** earned by **domestically located factors of production**

> [!rule] GDP Measurement Equivalence
> $$\text{GDP} = \text{Total Expenditure} = \text{Total Income}$$
> because every dollar spent by a buyer is a dollar of income for a seller.

It does **not** measure well-being or prosperity.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{GDP} &= \text{value of final goods produced (total output)} \\
&= \text{sum of value added at all stages of production}\\
&= \text{total income}\\
&= \text{total expenditures}
\end{aligned}
$$

### Expenditure Components of GDP

-   $C$ = Consumption
-   $I$ = Investment
-   $G$ = Government Purchases
-   $NX$ = Net Exports (Exports - Imports)

> [!formula] GDP Expenditure Formula
> $$\boxed{\underbrace{Y}_\text{value of total output} = \underbrace{C + I + G + NX}_{\text{total expenditure}}}$$

The net exports represents the spending on domestically produced goods by foreigners minus the spending on foreign produced goods by domestic residents.
TODO

---

## Gross National Product (GNP)

> [!definition] Gross National Product (GNP)
> Total income earned by the nation's factors of production, _regardless of where located_.

> [!definition] Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
> Total income earned by **domestically located** factors of production, _regardless of nationality_.

TODO distinction examples

---

## Nominal vs. Real GDP

GDP is the value of all final goods and services produced

> [!definition] Nominal GDP
> Measures GDP using **current prices**.

> [!definition] Real GDP
> Measures GDP using the **prices of a base year**.

---

## GDP Deflator

> [!definition] Inflation rate
> The percentage increase in the overall level of prices.

One **measure of price level** is the **GDP deflator**.

> [!formula] GDP Deflator
> $$\boxed{\text{GDP Deflator} = 100 \cdot \frac{\text{Nominal GDP}}{\text{Real GDP}}}$$

We can deconstruct the GDP deflator to see that it is a **weighed average of prices**.
The weight on each price reflects that good's relative importance in GDP.
**Weights change over time.**

$$GDP \text{ Deflator}_t = \frac{NGDP_t}{RGDP_t} = \frac{\sum_i P_{it} Q_{it}}{RGDP_t} = \sum_i \left(\frac{Q_{it}}{RGDP_t}\right)P_{it}$$

---

## Consumer Price Index (CPI)

> [!definition] Consumer Price Index (CPI)
> A measure of the overall level of prices tracking changes in the typical household's cost of living.

> [!formula] Consumer Price Index (CPI)
> $$\boxed{\text{CPI} = 100 \cdot \frac{\text{Cost of basket in that month}}{\text{Cost of basket in base period}}}$$

We can once again deconstruct the CPI to see that it is a **weighed average of prices**.
The weight on each price reflects that good's relative importance in the CPI's basket.
Weights are **fixed over time.**

$$CPI_t = \frac{E_t}{E_b} = \frac{\sum_i P_{it} Q_{i}^{\text{base}}}{E_b} = \sum_i \left(\frac{Q_{i}^{\text{base}}}{E_b}\right)P_{it}$$

---

## Categories of Population

-   **Employed**
-   **Unemployed**
    -   Not employed
    -   But looking for work
-   **Labor Force**
    -   Employed + Unemployed
    -   Amount of labor available for producing goods and services
-   **Not in Labor Force**
    -   Not employed
    -   Not looking for work

> [!definition] Unemployment Rate
> Percentage of labor force (employed + unemployed) that is unemployed.
> $$\text{Unemployment Rate} = 100 \cdot \frac{\text{Number of Unemployed}}{\text{Labor Force}}$$

> [!definition] Labor Force Participation Rate
> Fraction of the adult population that "participates" in the labor force (working or looking for work).

---

## Unemployment Types

1. **Structural Unemployment**
    - Mismatch between skills of workers and requirements of jobs
    - _e.g._ AI replacing human jobs
2. **Frictional Unemployment**
    - Time it takes to match workers with jobs
3. **Cyclical Unemployment**
    - Caused by economic downturns

---

## Natural Rate of Unemployment

> [!definition] Natural Rate of Unemployment
> The average rate of unemployment around which the economy fluctuates.

> [!rule]
>
> -   In a **recession**, actual unemployment rate $>$ natural rate
> -   In a **booming economy**, actual unemployment rate $<$ natural rate

Notation:

-   $E$ = # of employed workers
-   $U$ = # of unemployed workers
-   $L=E+U$ = # of workers in the labor force
-   $U/L$ = unemployment rate
-   $s$ = **rate of job separation** = fractino of employed workers who lose or leave their jobs
-   $f$ = **rate of job finding** = fraction of unemployed workers who find jobs

Where

Assumptions

1. $L$ is exogenously fixed
2. During any given month, $s$ and $f$ are constant

> [!formula] Steady-State Unemployment Rate
> $$\boxed{\underbrace{s \cdot E}_\text{# of employed people who lose or leave their jobs} = \underbrace{f \cdot U}_\text{# of unemployed people who find jobs}}$$

> [!formula]
>
> $$
> \boxed{\text{unemployment rate} = \frac{U}{L} = \frac{s}{s + f}}
> $$

**Policy**: reduce $s$ or increase $f$ to reduce natural rate of unemployment.
